Add accessibility guidelines for truncation (#325)
primer/design: content/accessibility/truncation.mdx

---
title: Truncation
---

## Overview

> Truncation means shortening a text when it reaches a larger length than required, usually shortened with ellipses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Truncation means shortening a text when it reaches a longer length than required, usually shortened with ellipses.
```

There are several parts of our platform where we will have some text, which can probably contain focusable elements like links,

> and we won't have enough space to show it completely, so we wan't to truncate it. How do we truncate it in the most accessible way?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and we won't have enough space to show it completely, so we want to truncate it. How do we truncate it in the most accessible way?
```

> The answer is unfortunately that we need to be a lot more explicit about how that truncation happens.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The answer is that we need to be a lot more explicit about how that truncation happens.
```

I suggest removing `unfortunately` to keep the tone more positive.

We would need to identify a couple of use cases to understand the way that truncation can be done.

## Implicit vs Explicit truncation

### Implicit truncation

> Implicit truncation means that a certain text is truncated and the user has to take an action to make the text appear in full, although that action is not an explicit action using a control in the interface, meaning that the user can only expand by hovering or focusing it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implicit truncation means that a certain text is truncated and the user has to take an implicit action such as hovering or focusing to make the text appear in full, rather than an explicit action such as using a control in the interface.
```

### Explicit truncation

Explicit truncation means that a certain text is truncated and it includes a physical control in the interface that can be clicked on or pressed with the keyboard, letting the user expand what is displayed.

## General Rules

### Focusable elements

As a general rule we should not use implicit truncation text that can contain focusable elements.

Some of the potential issues are:
- the focusable elements could be completely hidden and they will randomly appear when the user navigates into them.
- the focus seems to disappear.
- focusable elements can be truncated in the middle.
- "insecure" links can be focused via keyboard with no visual focus.

### Security

We don't want to ever truncate something that causes any potential security concerns.
For example, truncating a URL is a security bad practice, because the user doesn't have insight into where the link might be going.

> ### Untrue information

Reviewer 2: Really interesting! I didn't think of this!

In some situations we don't control in which part of the text the truncation is happening, so we want to avoid truncated text if that could be considered as 
"untrue information".

> Ideally never truncate in the middle of a word, and even more ideally never truncate in the middle of a sentence or paragraph.

Reviewer 2: It would be helpful to have an example of what truncating text to be "untrue information" might look like.

For example, if a text includes mentions, truncation can happen at the middle of the mention, confusing the user who's reading the text.
Or we truncate the name of a company, and we don't control where the truncation is happening, it might be that several companies with the similar beginning of their name have the same visual truncation, and that would be very confusing for the user.

> ## Truncation options

Reviewer 2: It would be helpful to provide an image that demonstrates each of these truncation options. Maybe something we can request design to create in Figma?

#### How to truncate via CSS

- `text-overflow: ellipsis` (combined with `overflow: hidden` and `white-space: nowrap`): This combination of attributes allows for easy visual truncation of long text which might overflow outside its container. However, since the text which doesn't fit never actually gets removed from the DOM, screen reader users will hear the entire thing when they navigate to it.

Truncation can be achieve applying the [Primer CSS class for truncation](https://primer.style/css/components/truncate) to the text element, so when a text reaches lengths larger than existing container, it shortens with ellipses.

### Progressive disclosure 

[Primer Progressive Disclosure](https://primer.style/design/ui-patterns/progressive-disclosure) is an interaction design pattern that can be used for explicit truncation.

### Using a tooltip

When working with a user interface control where the truncated text is not controlled by designers and developers, for example focusable controls with user generated or unpredictable content in them, CSS truncation together with an accessible tooltip is a reasonable option.

> However, tooltips are rarely appropriate, and its misuse can result in a myriad of accessibility issues, so always consider not using a tooltip for an improved user experience.

Reviewer 2: An example here to demonstrate the exact scenario where tooltip is appropriate would be helpful.

---
title: Truncation
---

## Overview

> Truncation means shortening a text when it reaches a larger length than required, usually shorten with ellipses.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Truncation means shortening a text when it reaches a larger length than required, usually shortened with ellipses.
```

There are several parts of our platform where we will have some text, which can probably contain focusable elements like links,
and we won't have enough space to show it completely, so we wan't to truncate it. How do we truncate it in the most accessible way?

The answer is unfortunately that we need to be a lot more explicit about how that truncation happens.
We would need to identify a couple of use cases to understand the way that truncation can be done.

## Implicit vs Explicit truncation

### Implicit truncation

Implicit truncation means that a certain text is truncated and the user has to take an action to make the text appear in full, although that action is not an explicit action using a control in the interface, meaning that the user can only expand by hovering or focusing it.

### Explicit truncation

> Explicit truncation means that a certain text is truncated and it includes an actual control in the interface that can be clicked on or pressed with the keyboard, letting the user expand what is displayed.

Reviewer 3: Small tweak:

```suggestion
Explicit truncation means that a certain text is truncated and it includes a physical control in the interface that can be clicked on or pressed with the keyboard, letting the user expand what is displayed.
```

## General Rules

### Focusable elements

As a general rule we should not use implicit truncation text that can contain focusable elements.

Some of the potential issues are:
- the focusable elements could be completely hidden and they will randomly appear when the user navigates into them.
- the focus seems to disappear.
- focusable elements can be truncated in the middle.

> - "unsecure" links can be focused via keyboard whith no visual focus.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- "insecure" links can be focused via keyboard with no visual focus.
```

Reviewer 3: Is this in reference to the `Security` section below? I wasn't sure, we could reference that section if so?

### Security

We don't want to ever truncate something that causes any potential security concerns.
For example, truncating a URL is a security bad practice, because the user doesn't have insight into where the link might be going.

### Untrue information

> In some situations we don't control in which part of the text the truncation is happening, so we wan't to avoid to truncate a text if that could be considered as 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In some situations we don't control in which part of the text the truncation is happening, so we want to avoid truncated text if that could be considered as 
```

> "untrue information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
"untrue information".
```

Ideally never truncate in the middle of a word, and even more ideally never truncate in the middle of a sentence or paragraph.

> For example, if a text include mentions, truncation can happend at the middle of one, confusing the user who's reading the text.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, if a text includes mentions, truncation can happen at the middle of the mention, confusing the user who's reading the text.
```

> Or we truncate the name of a company, and we don't control where the truncation is happening, it might be that several companies with the similar beginning at their name have the same visual truncation, and that would be very confusing for the user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Or we truncate the name of a company, and we don't control where the truncation is happening, it might be that several companies with the similar beginning of their name have the same visual truncation, and that would be very confusing for the user.
```

## Truncation options

### CSS Truncation

CSS provides mechanisms allowing you to visually hide or truncate content without needing to touch the underlying HTML.
CSS truncation will not removed the truncated text from the DOM, so it could look unreadable for a sighted user, but screen reader users will still be able to read it.

This method is purely controlled by the browser, and gives us no power on deciding where to truncate the text.

> We should not truncate large bodies of text using css. but there are times when we can truncate using CSS. If you're working with a user interface control where the truncated text is not controlled by designers and developers, for example a single line of text where cannot fit all the text on it, actually CSS truncation is the right thing to do because you're gonna show the full thing in an accessible tooltip.

Reviewer 3: It's possible that this is a stylistic choice - I tend to write more formally so feel free to ignore this :-D

```suggestion
We should not truncate large bodies of text using css. but there are times when we can truncate using CSS. If you're working with a user interface control where the truncated text is not controlled by designers and developers, for example a single line of text where cannot fit all the text on it, actually CSS truncation is the right thing to do because you're going to show the full thing in an accessible tooltip.
```

> If you're working with a user interface control where GitHub designers and developers have decided exactly what text it will have and exactly what its purpose is, meaning that is a generated conten and it's known ahead of time, then we should avoid truncating it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you're working with a user interface control where GitHub designers and developers have decided exactly what text it will have and exactly what its purpose is, meaning that is a generated content and it's known ahead of time, then we should avoid truncating it.
```

#### How to truncate via CSS

- `text-overflow: ellipsis` (combined with `overflow: hidden` and `white-space: nowrap`): This combination of attributes allows for easy visual truncation of long text which might overflow outside its container. However, since the text which doesn't fit never actually gets removed from the DOM, screen reader users will hear the entire thing when they navigate to it.

Truncation can be achieve applying the [Primer CSS class for truncation](https://primer.style/css/components/truncate) to the text element, so when a text reaches lengths larger than existing container, it shortens with ellipses.

### Progressive disclosure 

[Primer Progressive Disclosure](https://primer.style/design/ui-patterns/progressive-disclosure) is an interaction design pattern that can be used for explicit truncation.

### Using a tooltip

> When working with a user interface control where the truncated text is not controlled by designers and developers, for example focusable controls with user generated or unpredictable content in them, the CSS truncation together with an accessible tooltip is a reasonable option.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When working with a user interface control where the truncated text is not controlled by designers and developers, for example focusable controls with user generated or unpredictable content in them, CSS truncation together with an accessible tooltip is a reasonable option.
```
